This is a photo of me in my first year of
school.
There are about 38 children in this class
and, of whom, six survived.
My name is Lydia Tischler.
I’m 88-years-old.
From September ‘42 until May ‘45, I was
in various concentration camps.
Auschwitz was hell.
Auschwitz really was hell.
We were on the last but one transport to Auschwitz.
The last transport were all the prominents
in Terezin who went straight into the gas
chamber.
There were about 50 of us in a cattle truck
with a bucket.
That was it.
We arrived in the middle of the night and
in Auschwitz you could smell the fear.
You really could smell the fear.
And we had to go through selection which - we
didn’t know it was selection but that’s
what it was.
Mengele, of whom you may have heard, was standing
there and he looked at you and then sent you
to the left or to the right.
The left was the side for living and the right
was the side for gas.
I knew that our mother... because she didn’t
come to the left she went to the right.
But after the war I sort of hoped that maybe
she was in some displaced persons’ camp.
You know, that she wasn’t dead.
That somehow, by a miracle, she escaped.
We were herded into a huge hall and told to
undress.
And then somebody came and shaved all our
hair.
And then we were herded into another room
where we were sat on benches like in a theatre,
stacked.
And, by then, people who had been there for
some time told us, you know, you will go to
the gas chambers and so we sat there and,
I must say, I sat there and didn’t know
whether it would be water or gas.
It was water.
I remember when I came to Auschwitz in this
room that they took everything away from us,
there was a wooden board with the nationalities
of all the nationalities that were in camp.
And I think on top, I don’t think there
were any English people, French.
And the bottom two were the Gypsies and the
Jews.
And I remember, I have to remember this.
For some reason it seemed to me important
where they are putting us.
Day to day life someone - one just took every
day as it came.
I worked in the market gardens.
We were able to smuggle sometimes some of
the fruit.
For instance, cucumbers, if they were nicely
bent, you could stick it into your bra and
bring it into the camp.
And, luckily, nobody was taking our clothes
off to see what we had hidden.
Potatoes you could put in your stockings.
Tomatoes were not safe because they could
squash and that was it.
Paradoxically, I got acquainted with cultural
life in Terezin.
You know, music, there were of course all
of the well-known actors, musicians, writers,
professors were also in camp.
So there was a rich cultural and intellectual
life, as far as it was possible.
I heard Verdi’s Requiem for the first time
in my life in Terezin.
I would not have heard it if I had been at
home at the age of 12 in Ostrava.
Life, for people like me, wasn’t the worst.
It was much worse for older people who felt
the hunger and felt, you know, they had already
had a life that they were deprived of.
Usually, when people have to deny something,
it’s because they have to deny something
because he’s a nasty man and he doesn’t
want to feel nasty so he has to deny that
anybody - you know, he perhaps would have
like to do it himself.
This is how I understand, when people have
to deny the horrors.
In fact, when I came to England and I managed
to find a school and went to Brondesbury and
Kilburn high school for girls.
And when the girls heard where I came from,
and they asked me questions, I thought, “How
can they ask me these questions?
They’ve seen the films.”
But, when I studied psychology, I understood
that, when things are so outside human experience,
you really can’t believe it.
We managed, I discovered late-on when I studied
psychology and psychoanalysis, how useful
defences are.
You know, you could believe it and not believe
it.
You kind of told yourself, “No, they made
a mistake.
It can’t be true.”
So people just went to Auschwitz and very
few survived.
I think one person escaped from Auschwitz,
a Czech man who escaped and nobody believed
him, what he told them.
The best way to remember it would be if people
could learn from this experience so that it’s
not repeated.
And, in fact, it’s something that I’ve
never felt that I needed to revenge myself.
I also haven’t felt a victim.
They didn’t succeed in making me a victim.
I’m a survivor which is something very different.
We thought of them as inhuman but, I think,
they never made me feel that I’m less than
human.
I could, you know, I had to put up with what
they did to me.
You know, when they told me to undress, if
I said “I’m not undressing” they’d
have shot me or, I don’t know what they
would have done.
And, although the Germans were able to take
away all my physical - almost everything,
except my life, they left me alive.
But, you know, whatever could be removed from
my body, they removed from my body - they
couldn’t remove my soul.
My soul, they couldn’t remove my integrity,
my inner-self.
That I managed to maintain.
All of us have, you know, all of us have the
capacity to be sadistic and horrible to other
people.
We manage to not do it, you know, but the
potential for destructiveness is in all of
us.
I actually believe that people are born - well,
they’re born neither good nor bad and that
the badness is something that is the way someone
is treated as a child.
That, if you’re treated well as a child,
you can’t become a Hitler.